---
layout: post
title: Constant-pool erlang hack
---

p(meta). 2009-04-02

In "Erlang R12B-0 added a per-module memory area for constants":http://erlang.org/download/otp_src_R12B-0.readme, literal values in a module are stored there. Before, they were allocated on the heap every time they were referenced. This meant that some kinds of optimization that avoided literal lookup-tables became irrelevant in one go. A great example of the kind of improvements that OTP focus on, removing speed-bumps to having beautiful code. 

h2. From the release notes of R12B-0

<blockquote cite="http://erlang.org/download/otp_src_R12B-0.readme">
OTP-6850:  Literal lists, tuples, and binaries are no longer constructed at run-time as they used to be, but are stored in a per-module constant pool. Literals that are used more than once are stored only once.

This is not a change to the language, only in the details of its implementation. Therefore, the implications of this change is described in the Efficiency Guide.
</blockquote>

The "erlang efficiency guide on constant pools":http://www.erlang.org/doc/efficiency_guide/processes.html#8.2.1 pretty much say the same thing. But Björn Gustavsson adds this very interesting remark about "unloading a module and the constant pool":http://www.erlang.org/pipermail/erlang-questions/2009-March/042736.html.

h2. The hack 

If one has very assymetric access patterns to some value, Maybe millions of times more reads than updates, and this is a measured problem, one can reach for hacks such as "generating a module containing the values as literals":http://www.erlang.org/pipermail/erlang-questions/2009-March/042778.html and thus have a global configuration value that will not grow your heap unecessary.

h2. PS

But as always, remember "when to optimize":http://www.erlang.org/doc/efficiency_guide/introduction.html#1.1.

