---
layout: post
title: "Some Erlang progress that caught my interest"
---

p(meta). 2010-02-06

I have not been following the Erlang mailing list for almost six months, so these findings might be 'Teh old!!11' for all of you.

Kostis Sagonas has made an automatic refactoring tool called "tidier":http://tidier.softlab.ntua.gr/mediawiki/index.php/Main_Page. Take a look at this pdf presentation of what "things erlang tidier can do":http://www.erlang-factory.com/upload/presentations/121/KostisSagonas-ErlangFactoryLondon2009-CleaningupErlangcodeisadirtyjobbutsomebodysgottadoit.pdf. The homepage has a link to a web-interface where you can try tidier on your own code without having the tool locally.

On page 28 of that presentation I see this weird new list comprehension syntax. It is using double ampersands in what looks like a parallell list generator. That is news to me. Digging around I find "EEP 19":http://www.erlang.org/eeps/eep-0019.html which is on a standards track. Apparently we are going to be able to zip up lists using LCs in a bright new future.

My R13B03 does not have it. Tidier can refactor to it. I havent attempted a snapshot build of OTP on github. But I can guess this will be included in R13B04. Maybe tidier will be included as well. Maybe not. I don't know anything.

With all these source tools for Erlang (dialyzer, wrangler, tidier, cover,...) it might be time to adjust my attitude toward Erlang IDEs, because I am not using a single one of these tools religiously. There must be some reason why I don't. My main development platform is vi/erlang and Makefiles from the shell. If I need to go through this pain threshold to set it up it just won't happen until the pain of not using them is greater.


